02_newton.md, before:

Lecture 02: Root Finding
========================

Part of "Numerical Methods for Differential Equations", Colin
Macdonald, <cbm@math.ubc.ca>.


Rooting Finding
===============

Iterative techniques for solving $f(x) = 0$ for $x$.

*Bisection*: start with an interval $[a, b]$ bracketing the root.
Evaluate the midpoint.  Replace one end, maintaining a root bracket.
Linear convergence.  Slow but **robust**.

*Newton's Method*: $x_{k+1} = x_k - f(x_k) / f'(x_k)$.  Faster,
quadratic convergence (number of correct decimals places doubles each
iteration).

Downsides of Newton's Method: need derivative info, and additional
smoothness.  Convergence usually not guaranteed unless "sufficiently
close": not **robust**.



Systems
-------

$f(x) = 0$, but now $f : \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}^n$.

This is a system of nonlinear equations.  Denote a solution as $\alpha
\in \mathbb{R}^n$.

Derivation: Taylor expansion about $x$

  $$ 0 = f(\alpha) = f(x) + J(x) (\alpha - x) + \text{h.o.t.} $$

where $J(x)$ is the Jacobian matrix...

Pretend h.o.t. are 0, so instead of $\alpha$ we find $x_{k+1}$:

  $$ 0 = f(x_k) + J(x_k) (x_{k+1} - x_k) $$

In principle, can rearrange to solve for $x_k$ but better to solve

  $$ J_k \delta = -f(x_k) $$

That is, solve "$Ax = b$".  Then update:

  $$ x_{k+1} := x_k + \delta $$

Commit message:

added more description for error bounds for bisection method and Newton's method.

02_newton.md, after:

Lecture 02: Root Finding
========================

Part of "Numerical Methods for Differential Equations", Colin
Macdonald, <cbm@math.ubc.ca>.


Rooting Finding
===============

Iterative techniques for solving $f(x) = 0$ for $x$.

*Bisection*: start with an interval $[a, b]$ bracketing the root.
Evaluate the midpoint.  Replace one end, maintaining a root bracket.
Linear convergence. Error is roughly halved at every iteration as the interval is halved: 

$$ \frac{|e_{k+1}|}{|e_k|} \le \frac{1}{2} $$
 Slow but **robust**.

*Newton's Method*: $x_{k+1} = x_k - f(x_k) / f'(x_k)$.  Faster,
quadratic convergence (number of correct decimals places doubles each
iteration).

$$ \frac{|e_{k+1}|}{|e_k|^2} \le c $$

Downsides of Newton's Method: need derivative info, and additional
smoothness.  Convergence usually not guaranteed unless "sufficiently
close": not **robust**.



Systems
-------

$f(x) = 0$, but now $f : \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}^n$.

This is a system of nonlinear equations.  Denote a solution as $\alpha
\in \mathbb{R}^n$.

Derivation: Taylor expansion about $x$

  $$ 0 = f(\alpha) = f(x) + J(x) (\alpha - x) + \text{h.o.t.} $$

where $J(x)$ is the Jacobian matrix...

Pretend h.o.t. are 0, so instead of $\alpha$ we find $x_{k+1}$:

  $$ 0 = f(x_k) + J(x_k) (x_{k+1} - x_k) $$

In principle, can rearrange to solve for $x_k$ but better to solve

  $$ J_k \delta = -f(x_k) $$

That is, solve "$Ax = b$".  Then update:

  $$ x_{k+1} := x_k + \delta $$
